NEGATION
---------

(a)
Ranjit ka3ee-t2 ya-nn-e nææ
(name) shop-DAT go-NPT-Foc no
'Ranjit does not go to the shop:
Lit. 'Ranjit is going to shop, not'

Negative sentences are formed by adding the negative particle nææ to non-verbal
or verbal predicates.
In the case of verbal
predicates, the negative particle follows the predicate after its change into focus form with
the suffix -e.
Also the negative particle newei. Syntactically, its behavior is different
from that of nææ in that the basic declarative form of the verb to which it is added does
not change into focus form. Through this behavior it negates the focus of the verbal
predicate and implies an alternative possibility.
All negative particles appear to the right of the predicate

(a)
eyaa guruw2r2y-ek newei
he teacher-INDF not
'He is not a teacher'

(a)
Ranjit ka3ee-t2 ya-n2-Wa newei
(name) shop-·DAT go-NPT-IND not
'Ranjit isn't going to the shop, ...'
Lit. '(That) Ranjit is going to the shop is not'

(a)
miniha ka-n2-wa newei, gili-n2wa
man eat-NPT-IND not devour-IND
'The man is not eating; he's devouring:

nææ (verbal negator) is option 2 or 3.. either a negative auxiliary verb or an independent adverb
newei (focus negator) same.. changes associated verb to out of focus form to imply an alternative
Newei occurs at the end of a focused constituent negating constituent focus, as in ( 49),
or at the end of a sentence negating sentence focus, as in (50). Thus the particle appears
as a focus marking form for the preceding elements

balla piduru ka-nne-t nææ
dog hay eat-NPT.FOC-CONJ no
gonaa-t;) ka-nm de-nne-t nææ
bull-OAT eat-INF give-NPT.l'OC-CONJ no
'The dog neither eats hey nor allows the bull to eat it'
^neither nor situation appends -t/CONJ to focus verb

(a): single auxiliary negation

(a) Ranjit bo-nne nææ
Ranjit drink-NPT.Foc no
'Ranjit doesn't drink:

(b) Ranjit wiiduru2 binde nææ
Ranjit glass break.PT.Foc no
'Ranjit: didn't break the glass:

---- not sentential
(a) Ranjit newei wiiduru2 bind-e
Ranjit FN glass break.PT·FOC
'Ranjit was not the one who broke the glass:

---- not sentential
(a) Ranjit wiiduru2 newei bind-e
Ranjit glass FN break.PT-Foc
'It was not the glass that Ranjit broke:

(a) Ranjit wiiduru2 binda newei
Ranjit glass break.P AST FN
'It was not the case that Ranjit broke the glass:

There are examples of negative ellipsis responses on a:265

On the other hand, nææ is the neutral
negator, and can be used to negate clauses with verbal and adjectival predicators, and
only some postpositional and nominal predicates. nææ must immediately follow the
predicate, which is marked with the suffix -e, in the case of a verb, as in (17). On the
other hand, nemey may follow any constituent including the predicate. The constituent
preceding nemey carries the negative focus reading. When nemey follows the
predicate, it negates the whole event (i.e. proposition) or the predicate with its
complements may have negative focus meaning depending on the context, as in (17)
and (18a).

(b) mee pot2 itihaase gaen2 {nemey/*nææ}. - can only be FNEG with postpositional or nominal equational sentences
this book history about {FNEG/*NEG}
‘This books (is) not about history.’

(b) nemey is simply the negative marker, not a predicate.
Thus, nemey negates postpositional, nominal and AN sentences, as well as being the
negative focus marker. On the other hand, nææ negates locative/existential clauses, in
which is it a negative predicate, as well as being the negator for verbal and adjectival
sentences, in which it is a negative marker.


** Think nææ is a negative auxiliary verb because it affects the verb morphology and is in the
same position as other auxiliary verbs
** Think nemei is an independent adverb that goes after the VP

---------
AGREEMENT
----------

In general, verbs do not show number, person, and gender agreements with the subject
except for second person agreement with imperatives

No subject-verb agreement, it's only influenced by pragmatics like
the second person imperatives

This is not the case in literary Sinhala, but it is for colloquial :)

But subject-verb do agree in case... (? maybe in the below section meaning only certain cases allowed with certain verbs...)

(c) Any argument may appear in the nominative case,

Spoken Sinhala distinguishes four cases for inanimate nouns: nominative (direct), dative,
genitive, and instrumental, and six cases for animate nouns: nominative, accusative, dative,
genitive, instrumental, and vocative. Animate pronouns occur in all except for the vocative,
while inanimate pronouns are found in all but the vocative and the accusative case.
S: Nominative A: Nominative O: Nominative
 Accusative       -         Accusative
 Dative       Dative        Dative
 Instrumental Instrumental

volitive vs involitive verbs
Accusative and dative S both occur with involitive verb stems
only nominative case can occur with verb stems lacking involitive derivation
dative case is only found with a few verbs
inanimates can only be marked with the nominative case. (?)

so S constraints as follows:
S.INAM.NOM V
S.ANIM.NOM V.VOL
S.ANIM.ACC V.INVOL
S.ANIM.DAT V.INVOL
(S.ANIM.NOM V.INVOL) - default NOM if ACC marker is dropped (ignoring this for now....)

Q: How do we account for case markings when it depends on the nature of the verb? For example
Sinhala uses INVOL to show involitive verbs and there are certain constraints about
what types of subjects can be with these verbs. However, the sources also state different
constraints depending on whether the verb ........ can't remember my question and also maybe it's too intricate for now

A arguments can be found in the nominative, the dative, or the
instrumental case. (check other sources for instrumental.. this one doesn't use it)

A constraints:
A.INAM.NOM
A.ANIM.NOM V.VOL
A.ANIM.DAT V.INVOL (generally cognition or sensation)

O constraints:
O arguments occur in the nominative, the accusative, or the dative case
O.INAM.NOM V
O.ANIM.NOM-IND V
O.ANIM.ACC-IND V
O.ANIM.ACC V
lexical specification of verbs -> O.DAT ######## not including these for now.......


Determiner/Noun
Q: Are we still not using demonstratives?

- the quantifiers for lab 2 all follow (one also precedes) PL nouns only, but don't inflect otherwise?
- case, person? person wouldn't make sense for these types of determiners, nor any?? Q. ask for an example.
- no resource examples for case
- Emily says don't include anything that is not mentioned/given examples for... so looks we have no examples.

Adjective/Noun

In occurring predicatively, adjectives are obligatorily
marked with the assertion marker -i (if vowel-final). Ex. The fruit (is) big-i

numerals are governed by the animacy of nouns as mentioned earlier. With
inanimate nouns, numerals appear, following them, just as nouns. Examples: gas dek2
'two trees, gas tun2 'three trees, gas dol2ha 'twelve trees'. With animate nouns, numerals
follow the noun as a combination of numeral plus connective. Examples: lama.i dedena.
'two children', la.ma.i tundena 'three children', la.ma.i dolosdena 'twelve children'.

Adjectives are the stem forms of nouns (derived from nouns)

Another characteristic of nouns that is also shared by most descriptive
adjectives is their ability to be heads of arguments, and be case-marked. Such forms
have different functions in a clause depending on the case markers, as arguments (4a)
or as adjuncts (4b). In exclamatory constructions, such adjectives occupy the place of a
head of an NP

ADJ do not inflect for number (according to translate..)
nor definiteness, gender...?

The gender distinction of feminine/masculine affects only singular suffixes. (nouns)

No gender inflection on this adjective:

us2 ekaa aawa
tall one-anim came
The tall one came

us2 ek-ii aawa
tall one--anim.female came
The tall one(female) came

Numeral adjectives??? - Melody is doing this part....?

------------
COORDINATION
------------

Q: disjunction needed? nope

1) collateral - linked together by comma (not explicit)

Ranjit ged2r2 e-n2wa bat ka-n2wa 4iiwee bal2-n2wa (4 is t with curly bottom)
Ranjit home come-IND rice eat-IND TV watch-IND
'Ranjit comes home, has a meal and watd1es TV.

b) conjunctive
(source a, but source b seems to put a y before the i)
conjunctive markers like -i (clitic) on NP or Verb
If the nominal or verbal constituent ends in a consonant, the epenthetic
vowel u is added before adding the clitic
Also clitic -t

(a) guruw2ru-i demaupiyo-i lam2inu-i paar2 sudd2 k2laa
teachers-coNJ parents-coNJ children-coNJ road dean.PAST
"Ihe teachers, parents and children cleaned the road'

(a) amma Ranjit-42 kamiseku-i Chitra-42
mother Ranjit-DAT shilt.INDP-CONJ Chitra-DAT
gaum2ku-i arat) dun.na
gown.INDF-CONJ buy.PP give.PAST
'Mother bought a shirt for Ranjit and a gown for Chitra'

c) particle use

The noun-coordinating particle saha cannot be used as a clause-coordinator in
Sinhala but can be between nouns and then put verb at end. (2 Examples a:182 - got em included)
- resources didn't have any examples correctly using saha but I google translated it
and it literally just goes between the nouns

d) (source b) changing to another tense - the events before the most recent event are past
participles and then final event is PST (-la participle construction)

mam2 [__ ged2r2 gihilla ] kaeaem2 kaeaewa.
 1SG.NOM [ house.ACC go.PST.PTCP] food.ACC eat.PST
‘I went home and ate.’

Kalyani ged2r2 gihilla, mam2 kaeaem2 kaeaewa.
 Kalyani.NOM house.ACC go.PST.PTCP, 1SG.NOM food.ACC eat.PST
‘Kalyani went home and I ate/With Kalyani having gone home, I ate.’

* mam2 [Kalyani ged2r2 gihilla ] kaeaem2 kaeaewa. - U because subject is not the same
 1SG.NOM [Kalyani.NOM house.ACC go.PST.PTCP] food.ACC eat.PST
For: ‘Kalyani went home and I ate.’

* mam2 [ma32= sadd2yak aehila ] diwwa. - U because subject (case) is not the same
 1SG.NOM [1SG.DAT noise.IND.ACC hear.INV.PST.PTCP] run.PST
For: ‘I heard a sound and ran.’




-----------------------

MORPHOLOGY

-----------------------

Rules for agreement affixes
Rules for tense/aspect markers
Rules for case affixes (if relevant)


when both, acceptable order is [definiteness]-[ case].

........

Nouns:
base + definiteness + case (both optional)
stem + -ak/-ek + case

ka3ee-12 (shop-DAT)
gonaa-12 (bull-DAT)
ma12 (1SG.DAT)
ap212 (1PL.DAT)
ged2r2-12 (house.DAT)

balla (dog.NOM)
bat (rice.NOM)
sindu (music.NOM)
eluv (goat.SG.NOM)
pot2 (book.NOM)
gee (house.NOM)
war2d2 (fault.NOM)
miniha (man.NOM)

ged2r2 (house.ACC)
kææm2 (food.ACC)
ba3u (commodities.ACC/NOM)
-- can't find many ACC but probably because it can also be as NOM

pot-ak (pot-INDF)
guruw2r2y-ek (teacher-INDF)

Sinhala has a rare subtractive system in nominal morphology, where inanimate
plural forms are derived by deleting the final vowel of the singular counterparts, at
least in their nominative and accusative form

pot (book.PL)

pot-2k-212 (book-INDF-DAT)
sadd2yak (noise.INDF.ACC)
kæm2 (food.DEF.ACC?)

pot-ee (book-LOC)
ged2r2 (house.LOC)
at-ee(hand-LOC)

ka3-en (shop-ABL)


Pronouns:
Q: wondering if we should put these as lexical entries??
Since we don't have enough evidence about them iini other
cases?
api (1PL.NOM)
mam2 (1SG.NOM)
ma4 (1SG.NOM)
eyaa (3SG.NOM)
eyaa-la (3.NOM-PL)
oyaa (2SG.NOM)
oyaa-la (2.NOM-PL)

ma-12 (1SG-DAT)
ap212 (1PL.DAT)
eyaa-12 (3SG.DAT)

ma-ge (I-GEN)

BELOW is not accurate

Nouns:
Case            Animate
              Singular  Plural     Indefinite(sg.) (remove final vowel first)
Nominative    -wa       -wo        -wek
Accusative    -wa(w2)   -wanw2     -wekw2
Dative        -wa32     -wan42     -weku42
Instrumental  -wagen    -wangen    -wekugen
Genitive/Loc. -wage     -wange     -wekuge

Case            Inanimate
              Singular Plural   Indefinite (sg.)
Nominative    -w2      stem     -wak
Accusative    -        -        -
Dative        -w242    -w2l242  -w2k242
Instrumental  -wen     -w2lin   -w2k242
Genitive/Loc. -we      -w2l2    -w2k2

Rules for any other affixes that are required so you get fully inflected forms



- do we gloss AND or CONJ? - CONJ is fine

-----------------------

**** TO DO: LEXICON ***** update the lexicon to have only stem forms!

Stem forms (rather than full forms) for any words where this is relevant
Auxiliaries, if necessary
Additional nouns/verbs if you have expanded the vocabulary in your testsuite
Adjectives


- Things to mention:
- removed "question" verbs for now
- VPs asyndeton and then update TDL later
- did not make a rule for single nouns because agreement doesn't matter
- we put two auxes possible to become NPT/IND - think these are supposed to be handled differently but didn't get to that


- made a rule for plural pronouns

- Questions to write:
- how to deal with vowel endings that require another letter
such as guruw2r2y - y for before another vowel
- participle coordination in system?
- didn't get to FOC part, wth -nne suffix




- neg aux form finite and non-finite? overgeneration
- perf part aux form/tense?

- we put auxes in full form without IND

- coordination - in -i
sadd2yak - indf acc
pot2 / pot-ak??

- go back to transitive verb dative subject. get rid?

Auxiliaries select for verbs in specific inflected forms
Other features - make other nonfinite forms
Add an auxiliary - make complement feature have form of whatever I made above ^
Then need to make the morph rules be finite for other verbs so that aux cannot combine with them?

Should see N ADJ to become NOM

Might not yet be in the matrix system yet to require a certain tense on the verb complement of the negation adverb (do it in TDL editing later)
- CAN do it with auxiliaries though

Need long skinny trees to go through each of the position classes

Mention where genders are marked, if not in the 3sg pronoun
Explain the affixes for definiteness

Indicative is a mood - should we add that?


QUESTIONS!

1. For the negative auxiliary verb, the examples are
"can" and "be" for contributing an independent predicate (with semantics) or
not, respectively. For a negative auxiliary, is negating contributing semantics?

2. Making a lexical rule type for definiteness. We have a
position class for indefiniteness suffix on all nouns
We also have the lexical rule instances for the two different
suffixes. What goes in the lexical rule type features? It doesn't
apply to any of the features listed.

3. I'm still very confused about morphology in the customization system so I'm going
to try to break down how I think it works and hope for feedback. In the lexicon,
should we replace our lab2 noun types per case in favor of a single noun type
(either nominative or root form?)? Then in morphology, I created 2 position classes,
one for definiteness (mentioned above) and another called case-position-class.
Case-position-class can be applied as a suffix to any noun and has a lexical rule type
per case, each of which has a feature for that respective case on itself and includes
the lexical rule instance for the affix. And since the definiteness is an optional
pc, followed by the case, definiteness-pc would be the input type to case-pc.
Is that the correct process?
